.. _qiskit-chemistry-installation-and-setup:

======================
Installation and Setup
======================

------------
Dependencies
------------

Qiskit Chemistry is built upon Aqua.
Like Aqua, at least `Python 3.5 or
later <https://www.python.org/downloads/>`__ is needed to use Qiskit
Qiskit Chemistry. In addition, `Jupyter
Notebook <https://jupyter.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install.html>`__ is
recommended for interacting with the tutorials. For this reason we
recommend installing the `Anaconda
3 <https://www.continuum.io/downloads>`__ Python distribution, as it
comes with all of these dependencies pre-installed.

.. _qiskit-chemistry-code-installation:

-----------------
Code Installation
-----------------

We encourage you to install Qiskit Chemistry via the `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>`__
package management system:

.. code:: sh

   pip install qiskit-chemistry

pip will handle all dependencies automatically (including the dependencies on Aqua and
Qiskit Core). and you will always install the latest (and well-tested) release version.

If your intention is not so much to access Qiskit Chemistry
as a tool to perform chemistry computations on a quantum machine, but rather to extend Qiskit
Chemistry with new research contributions --- such as new algorithms, algorithm components,
input-translation operators or drivers --- then it is advisable to clone both the
`Qiskit Chemistry <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-chemistry>`__ and
`Aqua <https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-aqua>`__ Git repositories in order
to have easier access to the source code of the various components.

.. note::

    We recommend using Python virtual environments to improve your experience.

Jupyter Notebooks and input files for Qiskit Chemistry are included as part of the
`Qiskit Tutorials <https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/Qiskit/qiskit-tutorials/blob/master/index.ipynb>`__.

---------------------------------
Installation of Chemistry Drivers
---------------------------------

To run chemistry experiments on various molecules, you will also need to install one of the
supported classical computational chemistry programs, or *drivers*, interfaced by Qiskit Chemistry.
Currently, Qiskit Chemistry comes with built-in interfaces for four drivers:

1. `Gaussian™ 16 <http://gaussian.com/gaussian16/>`__, a commercial chemistry program
2. `PSI4 <http://www.psicode.org/>`__, an open-source chemistry program built on Python
3. `PySCF <https://github.com/sunqm/pyscf>`__, an open-source Python chemistry program
4. `PyQuante <http://pyquante.sourceforge.net/>`__, a pure cross-platform open-source Python
   chemistry program

While the logic to
interface these drivers is supplied as part of the Qiskit Chemistry installation, the dependent
chemistry programs need to be installed separately.  This can be done by following the
instructions provided in Section ":ref:`drivers`". Supporting additional drivers in Qiskit
Chemistry can be easily achieved by extending the ``BaseDriver`` interface.

Even without installing any of the drivers above, it is still possible to run chemistry experiments
by using a previously created Hierarchical Data Format 5 (HDF5) binary file. Such files are created
by saving the intermediate data previously generated by one of the supported chemistry drivers.
This offers researchers the opportunity to share chemistry input files and replicate each other's
results.  Given its support to take an HDF5 files as the input to initiate a chemistry experiment,
Qiskit Chemistry has :ref:`hdf5` as an additional driver --- in fact, the only built-in driver
coming with Qiskit Chemistry.

A few sample HDF5 files are provided as input files in the ``chemistry`` folder of the
`Qiskit Tutorials \
<https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-tutorials/tree/master/community/chemistry/input_files>`__
repository.
